All right, so we've kind of made
it through the editing section, so
we've learned how to do quick edits,
we've learned how to do sources, and
we've learned how to do workspaces.
And now we're gonna move into
the debugging section in the workshop.
And so, this one will be different where
we won't be altering any HTML or CSS.
We will be altering some JavaScript but
more importantly, we're gonna
be looking at broken things and
trying to get a better idea of why
they're broken or how they're broken.
So, one concept that's great
is step through debugging,
and I find the room is usually
kind of split on this.
Where some people are super
familiar with it, and
maybe they've even done it before or
at least they understand the idea.
And other people, especially people who
haven't programmed in other languages
aren't really sure what it is.
And so the idea is that a step through
debugger, so when you put a console log in
your code, which is how a lot
of people debug JavaScript.
The code will run and then it'll hit
the console log, log it out, and
then it'll keep running
the application state.
So a contrived example of where
that has shortcomings would be,
you console log the link that you're about
to do an API call to and it's wrong.
And then you're like well wait, what set
it to the wrong thing, but it's too late,
the application states already finished.
Then you'd have to refresh the whole thing
or work through the whole workflow again,
in order to get back into
that application state.
And the contrived example of a link
being set wrong might not be great, but
if you can imagine an app
with a really big workflow.
Like you have to go to the site, you log
in, you add something to your shopping
cart, you go to the coupon page, you enter
the coupon, that's where the bug is.
So if you console log something, and then
you get the wrong value or not value we're
expecting, now you have to go manually
through that whole step again to get it.
That differs a lot from step through
debugger, so a debugger statement unlike
a console log, will actually completely
pause the application execution,
it will not go forward
until you tell it to.
And so, that can be a lot more powerful
because instead of just getting
your console log right, you can pause and
you can spend as long as you need.
Looking around, changing things,
walking back, walking forward, again,
you can really just pause
the whole app and look around.
So, I guess the way I usually think about
it is like, console log is great for
a lot of tasks,
like straightforward tasks,
like if you're just like, what's the value
of my post ID or something like that.
There's no need to use a debugger for
that, you can easily just console log it,
but when something's really wrong and
you wanna take your time and
really explore it.
Or when you've console logged three times
and you keep getting the wrong thing,
there might be a really good time
to use a debugger instead and
actually poke around, cool.
So, this lesson is pretty short,
but it's a little bit heavy, so
I'll kinda go through it and
then we'll take as long as we need for
any questions before we
go into the exercise.
And feel free to have me go back through
things, anything that's helpful.
So, I'll go ahead and I'll right click,
and I'll click Inspect, and
we're gonna be in
the Sources tab this time.
So let me close all of these, so
if I first go to Console before we get to
Sources, we can see I have
this function just for
demonstration purposes that's just logging
in the background, it's just an interval,
and it's just logging things out.
And so, if we click over here,
we can go to this Debugging js file, and
we can see I tried to make the whole
workshop not very js heavy.
So the basic idea is a set interval
which we'll get called regularly,
getting called every ten seconds.
And it does this code where it's just got
a couple things, so it calls function1.
Function1 is here, function1 sets
a constant then calls function2,
there's an if else, then it calls
either function3 or function4,
that's like the whole thing, again,
the JavaScript is not very important.
So if I wanna figure out what's going on,
let's say,
I wanted to see if function3 gets called
or function4 gets called, I'm not sure.
I can start at the very beginning and
you can really go anywhere you want.
And if you hover over these numbers here,
you'll see a little gray bar up here, and
if you click on one, it'll turn blue,
and that means a breakpoint is set.
At the same time, you can see over here on
the right sidebar, it keeps a list of all
the breakpoints that you have currently,
and you can see when is set.
So the ten seconds have gone by, so the
function gets called, and here we pause.
So you can prove it's paused in a lot
of different ways but, for an example,
you won't see any more console logs here,
because it's not getting called over, and
over again, anymore,
it's been fully paused.
And if you had a more robust website
with application state doing things,
you would notice it was paused as well.
So when something is paused, we use the
left sidebar we're using for Workspaces,
now we can kind of move that away
cuz it's not super important.
And then the center panel with our source
code, we usually use that to set one or
multiple breakpoints.
But when those are set,
then it becomes less important and
the right sidebar becomes the important
thing that we're looking at.
So let me minimize all these and
we can kind of go through because
they're all very different, and
we'll actually go bottom up.
So, all the ones here are just
different break points, right?
So we learn how to do a DOM Breakpoint,
in one of the earlier lessons,
that was when you right click on
an element in the elements path panel.
So if we were to go here, right click on
body, Break on, subtree modification.
Now we're to come back to Sources,
we would see that there's now
a DOM Breakpoint in here.
So this is just keeping a list, cuz if
you're debugging something really hairy,
eventually you'll probably have
breakpoints all over the place, and
it's kinda nice to be able to
have a central place for it.
So I'm gonna go back to elements, and
I'm just gonna remove this breakpoint,
cuz we're not using it.
Back to sources,
XHR Breakpoints are really interesting,
we can cover those in a bit.
But the basic idea with XHR Breakpoints
is that if you have an app,
this used to happen to me all the time
at Twitter, so we have twitter.com, and
it's doing constant API calls, right?
It's getting your timeline, and it's
getting your friends, and it's getting
your following list, and who to follow,
it's all these different things.
And all have that would be wrapped
in a single function, right?
Like a helper function like fetch or
Twitter API or something like that.
And so, there'd be a problem with one
of them that I really wanted to debug.
But when I put a breakpoint in the helper
function, as you can imagine, it would
pause every single time, and so I'd be
clicking play, waiting for my one to come.
So what you can do is these
XHR Breakpoints, you can click plus here,
and it's really nice.
It says break only when the URL contains,
and so you could do tweets or
something like that or
at Adobe, you could call it,
do something that's only the Photoshop
service or something like that.
And then the helper function you don't
need a manual breakpoint in, it'll
actually tell you when an XHR or a fetch
request happens with that in the URL.
That can be really helpful,
again, it's very powerful but
only in niche situations, right?
If you have too many function or
too many network calls, and
you really wanna breakpoint on only
one of them, you can use those.
But for mostly today,
let me pause this, for
most today we're just gonna be
in the regular breakpoints, and
this will be a list of things
where you have actually clicked.
So if I go through and
I click a bunch of stuff,
you can see this list is populating.
Go back down to just zero here, cool,
then we'll see Scope here,
so this is really nice.
So, if you've done any of the great Frontend
Masters courses on advanced JavaScript
or anything like that, you know
there's a lot of talk about scope and
how JavaScript variables are scoped.
Var versus const scoping and this scoping,
and all this different stuff like that.
This can be a really nice way to see what
this is set to, currently undefined, and
what scope you're in for the different
functions, like what's in scope.
So you have the local scope,
which is the set interval, and in it,
you have access to four top level things,
function1, function2, functions3,
function4, and this is undefined.
Then you have the Global scope, right?
And that's gonna be the window
in this sense, again,
not a JavaScript class, but
it could be really cool to go back and
rewatch one of
Kyle Simpson's JavaScript classes.
And while he's doing the examples,
open up this sources panel with your own
example and actually be able to just see
everything that you have access to
in your Local and your Global scope.
So this will just be all the stuff
that's on the window object, right?
So we'll go ahead and close that,
close that, and close that.
Now the Call Stack, right now you can see
the Call Stack is one line item long.
Because this is in the global scope,
there's a single anonymous function,
which is this anonymous function
right here, which is this one, and
that's the whole call stack.
But as we go further stepping in,
it can be really good as the Call Stack
expands to see, watch it expand basically.
And this kind of ties in earlier a lot
of people were talking about how real
world apps often use frameworks,
they often use helper functions.
And so, putting a simple debugger or
an HTML DOM Breakpoint,
might not get you exactly
where you need to be.
Because that event listener that
DOM breakpoint it's being done by
a helper function or
it's being done by React or Angular.
And so, this Call Stack is really
great because while it will start with
Angular React, something like that.
It will end up being really long and you
can back trace all the way through until
you see a file name that you recognize,
right?
So, often it'll look like react.js,
and then eventually it'll be my helper
component.js, and then eventually
it'll be current debugging view.js.
I'm like, that's the one,
so you can click on that.
You can also do a really cool thing with
these, when you're using frameworks and
things like that.
Which is you can find any script
that's like a third party library, and
you can right click on it, and
you can click Blackbox script.
And what that'll mean is your basically,
I don't wanna see that in my call
stacks anymore, and I don't wanna
see it on my breakpoints anymore.
So, I really recommend that if you're,
again,
if you're using one of these UI libraries,
React or Vue or something like that, and
you know the bug is not in
the React library itself.
So you don't wanna see 30
call stacks of React for
your two call stacks of your application.
You can right click on react.js and
blackbox it,
and then it won't show up here anymore.
And then Watch is really cool,
basically, you can add watch
expressions at any time and
we'll do this in a minute to keep an eye
on any variable as things move through.
So the equivalent of like,
let's do this as an example,
so the equivalent of
going into our code here.
So if we go into debugging.js,
and what we wanna do is we wanna,
what we used to do would be we
would console.log(foo), right?
That is a common thing we would do,
obviously,
it is just set to a string here.
And then you would, let us say, you would
hit play on it or remove this breakpoint,
you would see when it gets called for
the first time, it will set foo and
then it will console log it, right?
That is like a stuff
that we do pretty often.
So here it goes, it logs foo and
then a log some other thing.
So the equivalent in a breakpoint
would be to go ahead and
delete this console log and save it again.
And then put a breakpoint in here, the
same line where we added the console log,
and then add a watch expression for foo.
And so now it'll wait until it hits
the breakpoint at which point, so
we hit the breakpoint at which point,
the watch expression foo is here,
those are equivalent things basically.
So you can see, this is like a lot
more setup work than console logging.
So, only use it when you have a need to
use it, but it's also a lot more robust.
So if I go ahead and remove this
breakpoint set one back at the beginning,
and hit play again,
it'll go through and it'll stop here.
And so, all of that has just
been like what the UI is, so
now let's get into what step
through debugging means.
And step through debugging has to
do with these buttons over here.
And so, basically,
when you get caught in a breakpoint,
and you can always tell up here
there's this little thing that
says we're paused in the debugger,
you have a few options, right?
One button is to be like, I don't care
about that resume script execution.
So, if I hit this,
it would go away it would finish
cuz I have no other break points.
And then nine seconds later when it
triggered again, it would just break here,
again, and I could keep hitting
play every ten seconds.
Some other options that you can step
over to the next function call, so
if you're on one, you can step over two or
you can step into the current one.
So, say I had function1 and
function2 and I stopped at function1,
step over would send me to function2 and
highlight it.
Step into actually take me as we can
see here, into the guts of function1,
so now we've stepped into this function.
And so, you can basically walk down or
walk back out, any application.
Again, there's something to keep
in mind because of how this works.
So if you think about
the JavaScript execution stack,
and it's going line by line,
it's executing things.
You can always step over something,
you can always step into something.
But when you step back out, it can't
time travel, it doesn't go back in time,
it steps out and goes to the next line.
So, if you're here on function1 and
I step out, it will not take
me back to function1, again,
cuz it can't go backwards in time,
it'll take me to the end of the function.
And then if I hit play, I have to wait for
another function when we get called.
Just gonna pause for a second,
if I can make that more clear,
if anybody has any questions,
I'd love to answer those now.
Just on execution being paused and
the choices that you have to step
over into out of or play on.
Yeah, the question was I still don't
understand what's going on with watch.
And so, watch lets you put
any expression in here, so
you can put a variable name or
a function name or anything like that,
and as it gets paused,
you can see what it's set to.
So let me make an example,
let me deselect this and play on just,
we get back to the screen and
we go into the code here.
So inside function1,
we set foo to foo, right?
And then we call function2 and we pass foo
into it, and then we check if foo is foo,
which it will be and we call function3.
So let's take function3, we'll pass foo
into it, and then we'll receive foo here,
and then we'll do foo equals bar,
and we'll set that here.
Does that make sense to kind
of the JavaScript level?
So, we set a variable to something and
pass it in, pass it in again, and
now we change what the variable is set to.
Does that make sense?
Okay, so we'll save that and
we'll restart, and
we'll put our breakpoint back here.
And we'll give it a couple seconds
till it gets caught in the breakpoint.
Okay, great.
So as of this point, we have foo in our
watch expression and it has not been
defined, so it's unavailable, it would be
undefined if you were to console log it.
But we'll step into function1, and you see
that on this line it hasn't executed yet.
So as we know from JavaScript hoisting,
the declaration has been hoisted but
the evaluation hasn't happened,
so it says foo is undefined.
Into the next line function2,
at this point foo has been defined, so
now it's set to foo.
So it's basically,
it's like anytime the variable changes,
the watcher updates here.
So if we step into function2,
we can see that foo is still foo, and
then we step in, we can see that
we get into this call a function3.
Where we pass it in, step in again, and
we can see again this line
18 hasn't executed yet.
So as of this time, foo is still foo, but
when we step into the very next line,
now foo has been changed to bar.
So the watcher is like anytime this
variable updates, let me know, and
that's really important because
if we didn't pass it in,
then foo would go back to undefined,
because it wouldn't be in that scope.
But it's basically, the watchers
are the same, the watcher is basically
the equivalent of wherever we currently
are in, we have the blue line
is of doing a console log of whatever
you put in the watcher at that line.
That's like the same thing,
it's just the way of logging out values.
Cool, and so, again, so the kind of thing
to do when you're debugging code would
be to figure out where the problem is.
That's always the first
thing that you wanna do,
like what function has the problem or
whatever.
So if you're getting something like
foo.bar is undefined, you're like, okay,
and maybe you would see that in your
console, you'd see foo.bar is undefined.
And you'd click on the file
name over here, and
it would take you into the Sources
tab where you're calling foo.bar.
And then you can put a breakpoint on it,
or
you can put a breakpoint right after it.
And you could watch all the foo and
see what properties foo does have,
does it have a bar?
No, does it have a baz,
maybe does have that those kinda things.
So you can really take as long as you
need paused in this execution state, and
kinda when you're done, you can hit
play and it'll play it through.